HMMER 1.8
Installation instructions 
Sean Eddy, 16 April 1995
------------------------------------------

1) Edit the top of the Makefile. 
   Set the paths and other make variables to suit your system.

   The default Makefile is configured for cc (your vendor's compiler) 
   and -O optimization. The package builds "out of the box" on
   SGI IRIX, Solaris, or DEC Alpha OSF/1 platforms, without 
   any special modifications to cc's command line (MDEFS, CFLAGS). 

   On SunOS 4.1.x systems, you will have to use GNU's gcc,
   because SunOS cc is not ANSI-compliant.

   Myself, I compile with "gcc -O2". gcc gives me executables
   that run ~10% faster than the IRIX 5.3 C compiler produces.  

2) type 'make' to build the programs.

3) type 'make test' to run a battery of exercises on the
   programs. You need Perl to do this. If Perl is not in
   /usr/local/bin/perl you will have to change the path in 
   the first line of the script Testsuite/Run_Tests. Running 
   the tests is optional, but you may find it comforting
   to see that the programs run and pass some rudimentary
   checks. (I do.)

4) type 'make install' to install the programs and man pages. 
   
   You may have to become root, depending on where you're installing.

   Note on man pages: If you can install unformatted man pages,
   set INSTMAN to be "cp" in the Makefile. If you can't -- for
   instance, many SGIs don't have nroff installed -- I've
   provided my Perl script "instman.pl" that uses the same
   command-line syntax as cp, but uses groff to format the
   .man file before installing it.
 
4) type 'make clean' to clean up.

   And if you haven't already, print out the User's Guide, Userguide.ps,
   using "lpr" or whatever you do to print PostScript documents:

5) lpr Userguide.ps


Note on environment variables:

   HMMER reads two environment variables:
      BLASTDB  - directory location of FASTA-formatted sequence databases
      BLASTMAT - directory location of PAM scoring matrices
   If you have installed BLAST, you probably already have these 
   environment variables set in system-wide or user-specific
   .cshrc files. They are optional. If they are set up, you
   can simplify command lines to:
      > hmmls my.hmm swiss31
   instead of
      > hmmls my.hmm /some/long/path/to/databases/swiss31

This package has been built and tested on the following systems:
  SGI 340/VGX and SGI Indigo R4000 running IRIX 4.0.x and IRIX 5.x
  DEC 5000 running Ultrix 4.2	
  DEC Alpha running OSF/1	
  Sun SPARCstations running SunOS 4.1.x and Solaris 2.x
  Alliant FX/2800 running Concentrix 2.2	
  Micron 120 Mhz Pentium running Solaris 2.4

It is currently maintained under IRIX on an Indigo2 R4400.

- Sean Eddy
  eddy@genetics.wustl.edu
